[Editorial] Difference Arrays (#4558)
cpinitiative/usaco-guide: content/3_Silver/More_Prefix_Sums.mdx

<Problems problems="cum2" hideSuggestProblemButton />

## Difference Arrays

<Resources>
	<Resource source="Codeforces" title="An Introduction To Difference Arrays" starred />

> </Resources>

Reviewer: did you forget to link this resource? also probably why build is failing

Author: lmao

<FocusProblem problem="sample3" />

### Explanation

> We need to know how many times each operation is applied i.e. how many times is contained within a query interval.
> For this, maintain a frequency array $s$; $s[i]$ is the number of times operation $i$ is applied. The important
> step is how the frequency array is updated. Instead of iterationg through the interval $[l, r]$ and incrementing
> each value by one, which would result in $\mathcal{O}(K \cdot M)$ time complexity, we could just increment
> $s[l]$ by one, the left bound, and decrement by one $s[r+1]$, the cell next to the right bound. After processing the queries
> we obtain the frequency array by doing prefix sums on $s$, resulting in $\mathcal{O}(M)$ time complexity. The second part,
> applying the operations, can be done exactly the same way. This technique is called difference array and has linear time complexity
> coming from interating through the array for making prefix sums.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We need to know how many times each operation is applied i.e. how many times is contained within a query interval.
For this, maintain a frequency array $s$; $s[i]$ is the number of times operation $i$ is applied. The important
step is how the frequency array is updated. Instead of iterating through the interval $[l, r]$ and incrementing
each value by one, which would result in $\mathcal{O}(K \cdot M)$ time complexity, we could just increment
$s[l]$ by one, the left bound, and decrement by one $s[r+1]$, the cell next to the right bound. After processing the queries
we obtain the frequency array by doing prefix sums on $s$, resulting in $\mathcal{O}(M)$ time complexity. The second part,
applying the operations, can be done in the same way. This technique is called difference array and has linear time complexity from iterating through the array for making prefix sums.
```
spelling

Author: ok

### Implementation

**Time Complexity:** $\mathcal{O}(N+M)$

<LanguageSection>
<CPPSection>

> ```cpp

Reviewer: would you mind adding a couple comments to this code?

#include <iostream>
#include <tuple>
#include <vector>

using namespace std;

int main() {
	int n, m, k;
	cin >> n >> m >> k;
	vector<int> a(n + 1);
	for (int i = 1; i <= n; i++) { cin >> a[i]; }
	vector<tuple<int, int, int>> updates(m);

> 	for (tuple<int, int, int> &update : updates) {

Reviewer: hmm, kind of agree with envy. is there any reason you chose to use tuples instead of vector/std::array

Author: Idk, It seems to me a little be weird to use vector/array for just 3 values, but if you consider it strange i'll change it

<Problems problems="cum2" hideSuggestProblemButton />

## Difference Arrays

<Resources>
	<Resource source="Codeforces" title="An Introduction To Difference Arrays" url="https://codeforces.com/blog/entry/78762"/>
</Resources>

<FocusProblem problem="sample3" />

> ### Explanation 2

Reviewer 2: how about explanation - [problem name] insteaed

Author: done

Let's create an array $s$, where $s[i]$ is the number of times operation $i$ is applied.
The important step is how we update it.

For an interval $[l, r]$, we can't loop through the interval and
increment each value, as that would be $\mathcal{O}(MK)$ and too slow.
Instead, we increment $s[l]$ by one and decrement $s[r+1]$ by one.

Now, we get the *actual* array by computing its prefix sum array,
resulting in $\mathcal{O}(M)$ time complexity.
The second part, applying the operations, can be done exactly the same way.

### Implementation

**Time Complexity:** $\mathcal{O}(N+M)$

<LanguageSection>
<CPPSection>

```cpp
#include <array>
#include <iostream>
#include <vector>

using namespace std;

int main() {
	int n, m, k;
	cin >> n >> m >> k;

> 	vector<int> a(n + 1);

Reviewer 2: is 1-indexing needed

Reviewer 3: its always way more convenient for prefix sum problems

Author: For convenience yes
